Instructions: 
Write an original essay of no more than 600 words on the following topic. We urge you not to reuse essays that you have written for other occasions and purposes. You can assume an intelligent but non-specialist audience: thus, you may want to avoid overly technical topics, or at least write about them using more generalist language.

Topic: 
We often encounter pieces of conventional wisdom. For good reason, these have become accepted ways of understanding phenomena in nature and society. But sometimes such pieces of conventional wisdom do not hold or apply, or are too simplistic.
Tell us about one such piece of conventional wisdom that you have come to doubt or question. Be sure that you address, at a minimum, the following three questions. What triggered this questioning? Why do you think this piece of conventional wisdom cannot adequately explain the natural or social phenomena? Finally, why is it important for you (or even for everyone) to rethink this piece of conventional wisdom -- what difference, in other words, can your questioning make?

Notes: 
Your essay should give us some insight into you and your thought processes, and help us consider if the University Scholars Programme (USP) is right for you. Our students tend to be curious, critical, and engaged. Thus, they are open to learning new things and making connections; they are also analytical and reflective, and strive to connect thinking and doing.


Brought up in a country of religious plurality, I have had the privilege of observing the similarity and divergences of faiths from a young age. I studied for 14 years in a Roman Catholic missionary school with 80% Hindu students housed in a predominantly Muslim area. Yet despite frequent vitriolics on the national stage,  what has interested me always has been their unrelenting refrain that no doubt harbors the best of intentions but seems laughably ironic in a land with no lack of shortages – “Charity is good”.
While doubts regarding charity have been latent in my mind, what triggered off a major overhaul in thinking about this contentious issue was a speech (later converted to a pop-rap remix) delivered by Dutch historian Rutger Bregman at the Davos Economic Summit last year. Bregman blows up hypocritical philanthropists for being emperors without clothes, millionaires who sit around having caviar and discussing world poverty and solve it away by committing a token sum of money.

Religion favours a similar monetary approach toward combating suffering and poverty, something which sounds compassionate and altruistic but which jarred with me nevertheless. I decided to adopt a cold, socio-economic basis toward understanding the impacts of this piece of conventional wisdom. An insight I drew from Bregman’s worthy diatribe and his book Utopia for Realists was the difference between policies  that are one-off quick fixes (event-based, like charity) and those that are truly impactful, long-term reforms (strategy-based). What I found - the small beer of charity easily distracts from the less sentimental strategy for the eradication of poverty, and only scratches the surface of a much deeper problem.

Charity merely attempts to ameliorate the symptoms of human suffering and pushes a pessimistic narrative of the permanence of poverty and hence our need to do whatever we can, treating the world as a zero-sum game where my sacrifice or donation should result in your benefit. However, research has proven that is impossible for a vulnerable community to sustain what is donated to them, and over time the community becomes increasingly dependent on continued waves of charity rather than empowering itself.  This leads to fortifying the “white man’s burden” with privileged classes deciding what the poor need, rather than strengthening them to acquire their own livelihood. 

Not only does charity (being a piecemeal measure) prove ineffective in combating poverty, it has negative externalities as well.  It absolves people of all responsibility of making sustained changes to people’s lives once they write out a cheque or donate clothes to a thrift store. And even here, second-hand clothes donated to charities like Oxfam have been revealed by The Guardian, Tansky Hoskins and the World Bank to be detrimental to the local economy , as these clothes flood market stalls and ruin livelihoods of native craftsmen. It has a paradoxical effect of leaving the “beneficiary” of charitable goods worse off than before. 

It may seem like I am advocating for a  heartless world without the altruistic spirit. Quite the contrary, my vision of a better world is to channel altruism towards sustained, constructive change such as a universal basic income or universal healthcare, in the firm belief that you improve society not by transferring one piece of the pie to another, but by growing the pie by boosting human capital. The ability to reason in the long term and not act by instinct (religious or moral thereof) has been the hallmark of progress in the past century, and  I believe the argument against charity feeds into a broader stand against the growing tide of short-term appeasement for long term pain. In an era of instant news and constant political mollycoddling and populism, it is easy to be swept away by the former.
  
Charity makes us poorer.
