Brought up in a country of religious doctrine, I have had the privilege of observing the similarity and divergences of faiths from a young age. I studied for 14 years in a Roman Catholic missionary school with 80% Hindu students housed in a predominantly Muslim area. Yet despite frequent vitriolics on the national stage,  what has interested me always has been their unrelenting refrain that no doubt harbors the best of intentions but seems laughably ironic in a land with no lack of shortages – “Charity is good”.

While doubts regarding charity have been latent in my mind, what triggered off a major overhaul in thinking about this contentious issue was a pop-remixed rap about taxation delivered by Dutch historian Rutger Bregman at the Davos Economic Summit last year, where he blows up hypocritical, self-assumed philanthropists for flying in their private jets and claiming global warming and income inequality must be dealt with soon – emperors without clothes. I needed to go beyond the “give a man a fish he will eat for a day, teach a man to fish…” argument.
I decided to adopt a cold, economic basis analysis understanding the reality of the apparently unassailable“virtue” imparted to me. It is impossible for a vulnerable community to sustain what is donated to them, without first making the community stronger. It is akin to treating the symptoms of a cancerous disease of poverty with energy drinks instead of sustained radiation.  Secondly, charity fructifies the “white man’s burden” with privileged classes deciding what the poor need, rather than empowering them to acquire their own livelihood.

Not only does charity (being a piecemeal measure) prove ineffective in combating poverty, it has negative externalities as well.  It absolves people of all responsibility of making sustained changes to people’s lives once they write out a cheque or donate clothes to a thrift store. Second-hand clothes donated to charities like Oxfam have been revealed by The Guardian, Tansky Hoskins and the World Bank to be detrimental to the local economy , as these clothes flood market stalls and ruin livelihoods of native craftsmen. It renders the “beneficiary” of charitable goods completely dependent on the donor country forever. The conventional wisdom of a “win-win” situation is more of a “lose-lose” one, yet homespun images of compassionate giving obfuscate this cold fact. Charity also breeds malicious televangelists, who are no more than Ponzi schemers in religious garb,and who appeal  to the naïve charitable instinct to mint money.

The small beer of charity easily distracts from the less sentimental aim for the eradication of poverty, and only scratches the surface of a much deeper problem. An insight I drew from Bregman’s worthy diatribe and his book Utopia for Realists was the difference between policies (moral and economic) that are one-off quick fixes (event-based, like charity) and those that are truly impactful, long-term reforms (strategy-based). The ability to reason in the long term and not act by instinct (religious or moral thereof) has been the hallmark of progress in the past century, and  I believe the argument against charity feeds into a broader stand against the growing tide of short-term appeasement for long term pain. In an era of instant news and constant political mollycoddling and populism, it is easy to be swept away by the former. 
 
Charity makes us poorer.
